Now I'll comment this out and let's move on to the next part about arrays,
let's have a look at how we can add data to arrays.
Let's say we have hobbies here, sports and cooking and now we want to add new data to thar array,
there are a couple of different ways of doing that actually.
You already learned about one way of doing it,
you can call hobbies.push and for example add reading here.
We then console log hobbies here and I reload,
you see this has been added and push, and that's important, always adds new elements
at the end of the array.
Now what if you would want to add an element at the beginning of an array?
Well that's also possible. Besides push,
there also is unshift.
Now might be a bit of a strange name because un sounds like it undo's something but actually this adds
an item to the array
and I'll come back to why it's named like this in a second,
so here we could then also add coding. If I now save that and we reload,
we see coding as the first element here added in front of the other elements.
Now we also sometimes want to remove elements and there we got simple methods for removing the last
or the first element,
for example let's say here I then want to remove the last element,
well we can do this with pop.
If we do that, if we just call hobbies.pop and I reload
now, we see we get an array with three elements where the last element is cooking, which is our element
here because the element I pushed at the end, reading, is popped here.
Now also nice to know, pop does indeed return the element in removed.
So here since I run it on an array of strings, it will return a string, I'm not doing anything with the
return value here,
I just let it go into the void
but you could store the pop value here and then do anything with it if you need to. By the way unshift
and push also return something, they return a number which is the new length of the array and therefore
if you needed that, you could of course also store that to get the new length of the array after pushing
this or after adding this at the beginning with unshift. So as I said, with pop, we remove all item at
the end of the array,
we also can of course remove the item at the beginning of the array with hobbies.shift.
So we have unshift to add an item and shift to add it,
now why shift and unshift
in this way, why doesn't shift add an item and unshift remove it
because unshift sounds way more like removing something than shift. Well actually, the naming makes sense,
what shift does is it shifts all elements in the array one place to the left
so to say, that's why the first element gets dropped when we call shift. Now unshift on the other hand
shifts all elements to the right in the end,
so it does the opposite of shift which shifts to the left,
this shifts to the right.
So when we call unshift, sports is moved to place two or into the spot of element two, cooking therefore
is moved in the spot of element three,
that was reading, reading is therefore moved to a new index at the end and becomes the fourth element
and then coding is inserted in the now empty spot at the beginning and shift does the opposite, it shifts
the first element to the left and therefore deletes it,
that's why coding gets deleted and then it will move the previously second element in the first spot,
the third element in the second spot and so on, so unshift and shift move elements to the left and right.
So if we save that and we reload, we again have sports and cooking because all items which I push or
unshift eventually get popped or shifted. Now also one short word about performance.
If you need to unshift or shift, you need to do it,
there's no way around it I guess but you should be aware that because of the fact that unshift and
shift affect all elements in the array, they shift all elements,
this operation is of course slower, so unshift and shift, these operations are slower than push and pop
because push and pop only added the last element of an array, that don't touch any other elements of
the array,
they just add an element at the array or remove it. So push and pop are way faster than unshift and
shift,
still of course if you need to add something at the beginning of the array, well you've got to do it,
right?
So push, pop, unshift and shift help us add or remove items at the beginning or the end of an array.
Now what if you need to add items or manipulate items in different places of an array?
Well for that, you can use the direct index access.
So here we could select the element with index one, so the second element in our hobbies array and of course,
set it to a new item. It doesn't have to be the same type as the previous item by the way,
I could set a number here even though currently that second element is a string.
If I now console log hobbies and we save that and we then reload, we'll see that now we have coding
as a second element because I replace that. So with that, we replace this element at this index.
If we would want to insert an element between sports and cooking, there is a different method,
the splice method which I'll have a look at in just a second. Before we have a look at that,
let's have a look at another case,
what if we actually target an index which isn't set, like 5?
This array only has two elements
after all these operations,
so 5 actually targets the 6th element which it doesn't have.
Well let's see what happens if we add reading here, like this.
If we do that and we log that to the console, what we'll see is that here we got sports and coding and
then at index five, reading and we get three empty slots in between. Now by the way,
these really are three empty slots in there. If you would access one of them,
let's say you do log hobbies four here which is one of these empty spots and you reload, you see you get
undefined here, you get undefined here because nothing could be found in there in the end
so that's also nice to know.
Now this way of adding elements is very rare though, adding something at an arbitrary index number
where you then deliberately or not deliberately have empty spots in the array,
that's not something you want to do in 99.99% of cases I guess
so this is rarely used.
Still, it's nice to know that you can directly target indexes which don't even exist and assign values
to those.